Increases in population have usually been accompanied (indeed facilitated) by an increase in trade.
In the Western experience, commerce provided the conditions that allowed industrialization to get started, which in turn led to growth in science, technology, industry, transport, communications, social change, and the like that we group under the broad term of “development.” However, the massive increase in population that in Europe was at first attributed to industrialization starting in the eighteenth century occurred also and at the same period in China, even though there was no comparable industrialization.
It is estimated that the Chinese population by 1600 was close to 150 million.
The transition between the Ming and Qing dynasties (the seventeenth century) may have seen a decline, but from 1741 to 1851 the annual figures rose steadily and spectacularly, perhaps beginning with 143 million and ending with 432 million.
If we accept these totals, we are confronted with a situation in which the Chinese population doubled in the 50 years from 1790 to 1840.
If, with greater caution, we assume lower totals in the early eighteenth century and only 400 million in 1850, we still face a startling fact: something like a doubling of the vast Chinese population in the century before Western contact, foreign trade, and industrialization could have had much effect.
To explain this sudden increase we cannot point to factors constant in Chinese society but must find conditions or a combination of factors that were newly effective in this period.
Among these is the almost complete internal peace maintained under Manchu rule during the eighteenth century.
There was also an increase in foreign trade through Guangzhou (southern China) and some improvement of transportation within the empire.
Control of disease, like the checking of smallpox by variolation may have been important.
But of most critical importance was the food supply.
Confronted with a multitude of unreliable figures, economists have compared the population records with the aggregate data for cultivated land area and grain production in the six centuries since 1368.
Assuming that China’s population in 1400 was about 80 million, the economist Dwight Perkins concludes that its growth to 700 million or more in the 1960s was made possible by a steady increase in the grain supply, which evidently grew five or six times between 1400 and 1800 and rose another 50 percent between 1800 and 1965.
This increase of food supply was due perhaps half to the increase of cultivated area, particularly by migration and settlement in the central and western provinces, and half to greater productivity—the farmers’ success in raising more crops per unit of land.
This technological advance took many forms: one was the continual introduction from the south of earlier-ripening varieties of rice, which made possible double-cropping (the production of two harvests per year from one field).
New crops such as corn (maize) and sweet potatoes as well as peanuts and tobacco were introduced from the Americas.
Corn, for instance, can be grown on the dry soil and marginal hill land of North China, where it is used for food, fuel, and fodder and provides something like one-seventh of the food energy available in the area.
The sweet potato, growing in sandy soil and providing more food energy per unit of land than other crops, became the main food of the poor in much of the South China rice area.
Productivity in agriculture was also improved by capital investments, first of all in irrigation.
From 1400 to 1900 the total of irrigated land seems to have increased almost three times.
There was also a gain in farm tools, draft animals, and fertilizer, to say nothing of the population growth itself, which increased half again as fast as cultivated land area and so increased the ratio of human hands available per unit of land.
Thus the rising population was fed by a more intensive agriculture, applying more labor and fertilizer to the land.
In contrast to the political anarchy, economic dislocation, and military destruction in Spanish America, Brazil’s drive toward independence from Portugal proceeded as a relatively bloodless transition between 1808 and 1822.
The idea of Brazilian independence first arose in the late eighteenth century as a Brazilian reaction to the Portuguese policy of tightening political and economic control over the colony in the interests of the mother country.
The first significant conspiracy against Portuguese rule was organized from 1788–1799 in the province of Minas Gerais, where rigid governmental control over the production and prices of gold and diamonds, as well as heavy taxes, caused much discontent.
But this conspiracy never went beyond the stage of discussion and was easily discovered and crushed.
Other conspiracies in the late eighteenth century as well as a brief revolt in 1817 reflected the influence of republican ideas over sections of the elite and even the lower strata of urban society.
All proved abortive or were soon crushed.
Were it not for an accident of European history, the independence of Brazil might have been long delayed.
The French invasion of Portugal in 1807 followed by the flight of the Portuguese court (sovereign and government officers) to Rio de Janeiro brought large benefits to Brazil.
Indeed, the transfer of the court in effect signified achievement of Brazilian independence.
The Portuguese prince and future King João VI opened Brazil’s ports to the trade of friendly nations, permitted the rise of local industries, and founded the Bank of Brazil.
In 1815 he elevated Brazil to the legal status of a kingdom coequal with Portugal.
In one sense, however, Brazil’s new status signified the substitution of one dependence for another.
Freed from Portuguese control, Brazil came under the economic dominance of England, which obtained major tariff concessions and other privileges by the Strangford Treaty of 1810 between Portugal and Great Britain.
The treaty provided for the importation of British manufactures into Brazil and the export of Brazilian agricultural produce to Great Britain.
One result was an influx of cheap machine-made goods that swamped the handicrafts industry of the country.
Brazilian elites took satisfaction in Brazil’s new role and the growth of educational, cultural, and economic opportunities for their class.
But the feeling was mixed with resentment toward the thousands of Portuguese courtiers (officials) and hangers-on who came with the court and who competed with Brazilians for jobs and favors.
Thus, the change in the status of Brazil sharpened the conflict between Portuguese elites born in Brazil and elites born in Portugal and loyal to the Portuguese crown.
The event that precipitated the break with the mother country was the revolution of 1820 in Portugal.
The Portuguese revolutionaries framed a liberal constitution for the kingdom, but they were conservative or reactionary in relation to Brazil.
They demanded the immediate return of King João to Lisbon, an end to the system of dual monarchy that he had devised, and the restoration of the Portuguese commercial monopoly.
Timid and vacillating, King João did not know which way to turn.
Under the pressure of his courtiers, who hungered to return to Portugal and their lost estates, he finally approved the new constitution and sailed for Portugal.
He left behind him, however, his son and heir, Pedro, and in a private letter advised him that in the event the Brazilians should demand independence, he should assume leadership of the movement and set the crown of Brazil on his head.
Soon it became clear that the Portuguese parliament intended to set the clock back by abrogating all the liberties and concessions won by Brazil since 1808.
One of its decrees insisted on the immediate return of Pedro from Brazil.
The pace of events moved more rapidly in 1822.
On January 9, urged on by Brazilian advisers who perceived a golden opportunity to make an orderly transition to independence without the intervention of the masses, Pedro refused an order from the parliament to return to Portugal, saying famously, “I remain.” On September 7, regarded by all Brazilians as Independence Day, he issued the even more celebrated proclamation, “Independence or death!” In December 1822, having overcome slight resistance by Portuguese troops, Dom Pedro was formally proclaimed constitutional Emperor of Brazil.